there's something special I would like
to share with you today because very
recently life taught me another lesson
about resentment and that letting go of
resentment is actually a lot easier than
the mind makes us believe I would like
to share with you what I've learned
accompanied by a stoic as well as a
Buddhist perspective
[Music]
first of all I want to thank Tim for
supporting me on patreon and Waseem a
forest generous PayPal donation and kind
words I appreciate it very much guys the
Netherlands has been struck by a
heatwave the last few days
nevertheless the current liveliness of
nature is fantastic to spend time in for
those who think that Ines L Ghana is
some kind of enlightened being residing
blissfully in eudaimonia somewhere in a
forest Shack I have to disappoint you
although I do my best to improve my life
every day and share as much as I can
about what I've learned I'm still quite
a regular guy with flaws and
imperfections like most people have but
no matter where you stand in life what's
most important is that you make progress
the Dutch have a saying which in English
would go like this pulling old cows out
of the ditch this saying includes a
ditch and cows probably because the
Netherlands has many ditches and cows
but what it means is bringing up the
past now sometimes we have to bring up
the past we might need the past to solve
things in the present or plan for the
future but bringing up the past
repeatedly and without good reasons
becomes a destructive habit one thing
that often keeps people stuck in the
past is resentment
I've been grappling with feelings of
resentment towards a few family members
which has everything to do with an
ongoing family drama although I've been
able to let go of these feelings
temporarily especially of the
experiences associated with this
resentment they just kept coming back
sure the Stoics say that we shouldn't
worry about things beyond our control
but in some cases situations require
more than simply ignoring them
resentment is something that we create
ourselves because of the position we
take towards things it's grown out of
aversion
slowly but surely we begin to create a
story around his aversion about the past
how people wronged us and how they will
run us in the future like Epictetus set
and a cool
it's not events that disturb people it
is their judgments concerning them and
quote being resentful no matter how
righteous will not solve anything
it's like drinking poison and waiting
for the other person to die and even
when that person dies you're still
poisoned
thus no good can come from walking
around with a grudge like I have done
the good thing about engaging on a
philosophical journey as well as the
practice of meditation is that I've
gotten well aware about my feelings of
resentment what triggered them and what
exactly happened in my body because of
them this made it easier for me to let
go eventually and not be too bothered by
them but although I started to develop a
more healthy detachment in regards to
the whole situation
the resentment still came to the surface
sometimes somehow my I don't give a damn
attitude wasn't enough the Buddhists
have a mind hack that deals with
resentment in a very effective and
almost immediate way which is called
Metta also known as loving-kindness
Metta is the practice of loving all
beings unconditionally love eliminates
the most destructive qualities of human
life like hostility anger and basically
the whole range of a version by Metta I
started cultivating a sense of
compassion towards my family members
which helped me greatly to let go of my
resentment letting go of resentment
doesn't have to mean that it completely
disappears
deep inside resentment may still be
there but by letting go we choose not to
cling to it and not to follow it when it
arises still I had a lingering thought
that something had to be done
so I started examining my ethics
although the Stoics and the Buddhists
acknowledged the power of letting go and
living in a moment they also encouraged
us to do the right thing the old Stoics
were great apostles of justice looking
at stoic ethics we will realize that the
true path to happiness isn't a total
disinterest towards the world but rather
a life of virtue
the Buddhists have quite similar ethical
views based on the idea
that doing the right thing will
eventually and your suffering and lead
to enlightenment many disputes whether
there are family issues or work related
aren't solved because of Kuroda's and
tainted by unfair dealing we are afraid
of confrontation afraid to speak the
truth and instead we talk ill behind the
backs of those we should confront
according to the Stoics behaviors like
these belong in the domain of vice vice
leads to unhappiness so doing the right
thing means addressing unfairness and
cowardice which can be done by the
virtuous opposites fair dealing and
courage for me this meant picking up the
phone and speaking my mind of course
when we take action the outcome is
uncertain how other people respond is
not up to us but when we do the right
thing does the outcome really matter at
least we did the best we could fueled by
goodwill and free of resentment that's
what matters
confrontation and trying to solve the
situation isn't always the right thing
in some cases the best way is simply to
let it go and let our attachments to
past events dissolve this really depends
on the situation though and thus doing
the right thing isn't one shoe fits all
and requires a careful examination I
believe however that this examination
can only be done after we achieved a
healthy detachment from the situation so
we can think clearly and without
judgment or anger letting go of
resentment was the first step into
solving a lengthy and pass in a way that
benefits all parties involved thank you
for watching
[Music]